---
title : "From Cyber Security to Cyber Intelligence"
date : "2024-04-09"
---


I am Patricia and I started working in cybersecurity 6 years ago in
Spain, where I am from, as a Threat Hunter, a year ago I decided to
change country and my role in cybersecurity.

Those of us who work in cybersecurity have an advantage that is rarely
talked about, and that is the ease of changing roles within the
cybersecurity area. By this I mean, a person with a background as a
general cybersecurity analyst in a SOC can switch to a more specialized
field such as Threat Hunting in a very short time. This is due to two
facts: firstly, the knowledge base that underpins all cyber security,
and secondly, the number of positions that need to be filled within more
specific areas of cyber security.

In this article we will look at how to make the leap from a cyber
security analyst to one of these more specific areas: cyber
intelligence. To do so, I have gathered the knowledge I have acquired in
my last year, when I joined my current company, Luxoft. My previous
experience before joining Luxoft as a cyberintelligence analyst was as a
Threat Hunter, it is true that both roles share many points in common,
but I still had to learn new terminology and new methodologies to face
this new position. So, I have decided to collect all the knowledge
points you need to acquire if you want to make this change as I did
previously.

Before we delve into new learning, let's answer the question, What is a
cyber intelligence analyst? These two definitions capture very
comprehensively the functions of a cyber intelligence analyst.

"A threat intelligence analyst (TIA) analyzes and detects cyber threats
and malware impacting an enterprise. They investigate the level of
threat posed by an attack and consequently enable organizations to take
informed cybersecurity-based business decisions. These professionals are
aware of the cybersecurity risks of concern for different industry
verticals and help secure the critical assets that need protection.
Threat intelligence analysts prioritize threats and focus on the most
severe ones" --- SpiceWorks

"A threat analyst specializes in monitoring and analyzing active as well
as potential cyber security threats, while gathering useful intelligence
from an incredibly wide spectrum of sources." --- Flatiron School

Now that we know the role of a cyber intelligence analyst in a company,
let's take a closer look at what skills we need to be part of a cyber
intelligence team.

The cyber intelligence analyst needs to have extensive knowledge about
different aspects that can disrupt a company, not only in the cyber
domain, but also in the geopolitical and social domain. Therefore, the
analyst needs to be informed and up to date with this type of
information. For example, if you are part of a financial service's
cyberintelligence team, you will need to know what the past and current
situation of the country hosting the service is in the geopolitical
landscape. This will help us to be alert to possible changes so that
managers can make the corresponding decisions as soon as possible and
try to foresee future movements.

One of the most important points is to know **the cyber threat
landscape**. It is necessary to carry out constant studies of who we are
targeting and, in this way, track our possible enemies and their
motivations. Continuing with the example of financial services, I will
need to investigate which threats are going to try to sneak into my
system, in this case, we will target ransomware groups, as their
motivation is purely financial through blackmail, or groups like FIN7,
which, using other methods, their motivation is purely monetary. In
order to clearly differentiate each of these groups it is necessary for
the analyst to study and know the Tactics, Techniques and Procedures of
each group (TTPs) and to keep up to date on them.

![A person using a computer Description automatically
generated](./image1.jpeg){width="4.417361111111111in"
height="2.204861111111111in"}

FIN7 Group

Another important point that the analyst must have internalized is
the **intelligence cycle, the types of intelligence and the different
methodologies **that can be used. For this I strongly recommend the
study of the following list of books and papers:

· [[The Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis by Sergio Caltagirone,
Andrew Pendergast, and Chris
Betz]{.underline}](http://www.activeresponse.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/diamond.pdf)

· [[MITRE ATT&CK™: Design and Philosophy by Blake Strom, et
al]{.underline}](https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/pr-18-0944-11-mitre-attack-design-and-philosophy.pdf)

· [[Threat Intelligence Naming Conventions: Threat Actors, & Other Ways
of Tracking Threats by Robert M.
Lee]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CUNlgQBwc4)

· [[Cyber Intelligence Tradecraft Report --- The State of Cyber
Intelligence Practices in the United States by Jared
Ettinger]{.underline}](https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/EducationalMaterial/2019_011_001_546590.pdf)

![A diagram of a threat intelligence life cycle Description
automatically
generated](./image2.jpeg){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="4.7in"}

Intelligence Lifecycle

The last point to which the analyst must pay attention is to track
threats and understand the different attack methodologies used by threat
actors. To do this, we will make use of tools such as **YARA rules, log
analysis, Sigma rules and indicators of compromise (IOCs)**. All of them
will help us to detect possible breaches in our system. To work with
IOCs it is necessary for the analyst to have in mind **David Bianco's
Pain Pyramid**, which exposes the degree of pain inflicted on the
attacker depending on the IOC we discover and use.

![A diagram of a pyramid Description automatically
generated](./image3.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="2.4618055555555554in"}

Pyramid of Pain

In conclusion, the world of cyber intelligence is both exciting and
wide-ranging. If you are thinking of changing your role and entering
this fantastic world, it will be necessary to build a strong analytical
capacity to deal with the various fronts that a cyber intelligence
analyst has to cover on a daily basis. As an analyst who has recently
made this change of role I would advise to establish blocks of one or
two hours for each of the different fields in order to be introduced
little by little in each one of them and to read daily all possible
articles and reports published about threat actors, new TTPs, campaigns,
so on.

**References**

· [[https://www.picussecurity.com/resource/glossary/what-is-pyramid-of-pain]{.underline}](https://www.picussecurity.com/resource/glossary/what-is-pyramid-of-pain)

· [[https://mschalocy.medium.com/threat-intelligence-life-cycle-2012a5645806]{.underline}](https://mschalocy.medium.com/threat-intelligence-life-cycle-2012a5645806)

· [[https://medium.com/katies-five-cents/a-top-10-reading-list-if-youre-getting-started-in-cyber-threat-intelligence-c11a18fc9798]{.underline}](https://medium.com/katies-five-cents/a-top-10-reading-list-if-youre-getting-started-in-cyber-threat-intelligence-c11a18fc9798)

· [[https://onlinedegrees.sandiego.edu/cyber-threat-intelligence-analyst/]{.underline}](https://onlinedegrees.sandiego.edu/cyber-threat-intelligence-analyst/)

**Patricia Cifuentes Travé,**

**Cyber Threat Intelligence Analyst, Threat Hunter & CEO of ClearIntel**
